

This model is from the article:  
**Metabolic stasis in an ancient symbiosis: genome-scale metabolic networks from two Blattabacterium cuenoti strains, primary endosymbionts of cockroaches**   
Carmen M González-Domenech, Eugeni Belda, Rafael Patiño-Navarrete, Andrés
Moya, Juli Peretó and Amparo Latorre _BMC Microbiology_ 2012, 12(Suppl 1):S5;
DOI:  
**Abstract:**   
Background Cockroaches are terrestrial insects that strikingly eliminate waste
nitrogen as ammonia instead of uric acid. Blattabacterium cuenoti (Mercier
1906) strains Bge and Pam are the obligate primary endosymbionts of the
cockroaches Blattella germanica and Periplaneta americana, respectively. The
genomes of both bacterial endosymbionts have recently been sequenced, making
possible a genome-scale constraint-based reconstruction of their metabolic
networks. The mathematical expression of a metabolic network and the
subsequent quantitative studies of phenotypic features by Flux Balance
Analysis (FBA) represent an efficient functional approach to these
uncultivable bacteria. Results We report the metabolic models of
Blattabacterium strains Bge (iCG238) and Pam (iCG230), comprising 296 and 289
biochemical reactions, associated with 238 and 230 genes, and 364 and 358
metabolites, respectively. Both models reflect both the striking similarities
and the singularities of these microorganisms. FBA was used to analyze the
properties, potential and limits of the models, assuming some environmental
constraints such as aerobic conditions and the net production of ammonia from
these bacterial systems, as has been experimentally observed. In addition, in
silico simulations with the iCG238 model have enabled a set of carbon and
nitrogen sources to be defined, which would also support a viable phenotype in
terms of biomass production in the strain Pam, which lacks the first three
steps of the tricarboxylic acid cycle. FBA reveals a metabolic condition that
renders these enzymatic steps dispensable, thus offering a possible
evolutionary explanation for their elimination. We also confirm, by
computational simulations, the fragility of the metabolic networks and their
host dependence. Conclusions The minimized Blattabacterium metabolic networks
are surprisingly similar in strains Bge and Pam, after 140 million years of
evolution of these endosymbionts in separate cockroach lineages. FBA performed
on the reconstructed networks from the two bacteria helps to refine the
functional analysis of the genomes enabling us to postulate how slightly
different host metabolic contexts drove their parallel evolution.

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/).  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Novère N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

